Pollution is a term which even kids are aware of these days. It has become so common that almost everyone acknowledges the fact that pollution is rising continuously. The term pollution means the manifestation of any unsolicited foreign substance in something. When we talk about pollution on earth, we refer to the contamination that is happening of the natural resources by various pollutants. All this is mainly caused by human activities which harm the environment in ways more than one. Therefore, an urgent need has arisen to tackle this issue straightaway. That is to say, pollution is damaging our earth severely and we need to realize its effects and prevent this damage. In this essay on pollution, we will see what are the effects of pollution and how to reduce it. Pollution affects the quality of life more than one can imagine. It works in mysterious ways, sometimes which cannot be seen by the naked eye. However, it is very much present in the environment. For instance, you might not be able to see the natural gases present in the air, but they are still there. Similarly, the pollutants which are messing up the air and increasing the levels of carbon dioxide is very dangerous for humans. Increased level of carbon dioxide will lead to global warming. Further, the water is polluted in the name of industrial development, religious practices and more will cause a shortage of drinking water. Without water, human life is not possible. Moreover, the way waste is dumped on the land eventually ends up in the soil and turns toxic. If land pollution keeps on happening at this rate, we won’t have fertile soil to grow our crops on. Therefore, serious measures must be taken to reduce pollution to the core. Pollution has affected several major cities across the globe. A majority of these polluted cities lie in India. Some of the most polluted cities in the world are Delhi, Kanpur, Bamenda, Moscow, Heze, Chernobyl, Beijing among others.
Although these cities have taken several steps to curb pollution, they still have a long way to go. The air quality of these places is poor and there are cases of land and water pollution as well. Now it's time that the administration of these cities prepares strategies to check these issues. It is mainly caused due to vehicular emission of gases. Harmful gases are produced as a by-product in factories and industries, by burning toxic substances such as plastic and leaves in the open, by the vehicular exhausts, by the CFCs used in the refrigeration industry, etc. India has seen an increase in the number of vehicles on its roads. These are responsible for transmitting harmful gases such as Sulphur Dioxide and Carbon Monoxide. These gases are responsible for reducing the quantity of oxygen in the Earth’s atmosphere. They also cause several breathing problems, respiratory diseases, types of cancers, etc.Apart from contributing to air pollution, a large number of vehicles on the Indian roads also contribute to noise pollution. This is alarming for those who live in urban areas or near the highways. It causes stress-related issues such as anxiety in people. Apart from that, noise from the bursting of crackers, functioning of factories, music played on loudspeakers, especially during the festival season also contribute to noise pollution. If not controlled, it can affect the functioning of the brain as well. Often, the day after the festival of Diwali it is reported in the media how the bursting of crackers caused an increase in noise pollution in major cities of India. Although these are the four major types of pollution lifestyle changes have caused several other types of pollution as well such as Radioactive Pollution, Light Pollution among others.
If a place ends up getting light in excess or in an unwanted amount, then it contributes to light pollution. Nowadays, several urban areas are facing unwanted glares in excess amounts.
This is due to the fact that most Indian cities such as Mumbai, Bangalore, Delhi, Chennai, etc. have an active nightlife.
We are living in the nuclear era. Since a lot of countries are developing their own nuclear devices, it has lead to an increase in the presence of radioactive substances in the atmosphere of the Earth.
This is known as radioactive pollution. Handling and mining of radioactive substances, testing, minor accidents occurring in radioactive power plants are other major causes contributing to radioactive pollution.